log	
	8 October 1998: file created; initial documentation; Lisa Ellis    
	8 October 1998: data entry (Alameda 1998); Lisa Ellis
        10 December 1998: data entry (RGNC 1997); Lisa Ellis	
        6 October 1999: update documentation; Lisa Ellis	
        16 April 2001: update documentation; data entry (Alameda, RGNC, 		
        Santa Ana 2000); Kim Eichhorst	
        23 April 2001: data entry (RGNC, Santa Ana 2001); Kim Eichhorst	
        15 May 2001: data entry (Alameda, Savannah 2001); Kim Eichhorst	
	
	
ABSTRACT	
	
This file records data for cottonwood tree growth, sex, and survival at	
Bosque Ecosystem Monitoring Program (BEMP) sites in the Middle Rio	
Grande Valley of Central New Mexico, USA.  This is a citizen-based 	
monitoring program designed to provide ecological data needed for	
management of the riparian forest, as well as to provide citizens with	
a better understanding of and appreciation for this threatened	
ecosystem.  Cottonwoods were monitored at each site to provide	
information on existing size, growth and survial of this dominant	
riparian tree species.  Data collection was begun in 1998 at four	
sites in the valley.	
	
	
KEYWORDS	
	
population, Rio Grande plot, Populus deltoides, riparian, primary producer	
biology, demography	
	
	
WHY THE DATA WERE COLLECTED	
	
These data were collected to provide information on the existing size, sex,	
growth and survival of the dominant riparian tree, _Populus deltoides_	
subspp. _wislizenii_.  Data can be compared among the different BEMP	
sites to assess the size and condition of cottonwoods along the Middle	
Rio Grande Valley.	
	
	
WHEN THE DATA WERE COLLECTED	
	
Data are collected in the spring of each year, generally in April and May.	
Sample dates:	
1997	
	2. RGNC:  April-May
	
1998	
	1.  Alameda:  13 April - 4 May
	
1999	
        None	
   	
2000	
       1.  Alameda: April 	
       2.  RGNC: 22 April, 14 May	
       5.  Santa Ana: 27 April	
  	
2001	
       3.  Los Lunas: (dbh on July2)	
	
WHO COLLECTED THE DATA	
	
The Bosque Ecosystem Monitoring Program is a collaborative effort between 	
the University of New Mexico, the National Science Foundation LTER 	
Schoolyard Habitats Program, Bosque Preparatory School, and a number of 	
other schools and citizen-based volunteer groups in the Middle Rio Grande 	
Valley of central New Mexico.  Data are available to any interested parties.  	
Data are housed at the University of New Mexico via the Sevilleta Information 	
Management System.	

WHERE THE DATA WERE COLLECTED	
	
The following are the BEMP site locations:	
	
     1.  Alameda/Bosque Prep site:	
	
     2.  Rio Grande Nature Center:	
	
     3.  Los Lunas:	
	
     4.  Belen:	
	
     5.  Santa Ana:	
	
     6.  Savannah:	
	
Each site is set up as a rectangle with a length (200 m) running with	
the river. The site is located between the river and the levee and if	
local conditions permit, is at least 100 m wide (never less than 80	
m).  Sites also include a buffer zone of at least 20 m between the	
levee and the most inland edge when possible.  Sites are generally	
representative of the general area and forest composition, and are in	
areas with low human impact when possible.	
	
Each site includes ten 30 m long transects, around which sampling and	
data collection is coordinated.  Transects run parallel to the north	
and south boundaries, with the location from the edge of the site 	
determined randomly along a 100 m line.	
	
	
HOW THE DATA WERE COLLECTED	
	
Sample Locations:	
	
Cottonwoods are counted within each of ten, 5 x 30 m vegetation plots	
at each monitoring site.  Plots were located between established	
transects.   	
	
Methods:	
	
Cottonwood monitoring is timed to correspond with the cottonwood 	
flowering season, typically around the first week of April.	
	
Within each vegetation plot, all cottonwoods have been tagged and	
mapped. Only cottonwoods within the vegetation plot that intersect an	
imaginary plane 1.5 m above the ground are counted.  Trees that	
may originate together at the base but that split into separate trunks	
at or below 1.5 m above the ground are counted as separate trees, but	
this is indicated with the data.	
	
Data collected:	
	Diameter at Breast Height (DBH): measured at 1.5 m above the
	ground on the tree's west side.
	Sex:  binoculars are used to examine the trees flowers, if
	present, to determine whether trees are male, female or
	unknown (no flowers present).
	Only living trees are recorded, so in subsequent years
	mortality information will be available for trees alive the 
	previous season.
	
	
VARIABLE DESCRIPTION	
	
year = year of data collection	
site = numerical code for monitoring site:	
          1 = Bosque Prep/Alameda site	
          2 = Rio Grande Nature Center	
          3 = Los Lunas	
          4 = Belen	
          5 = Santa Ana	
          6 = Savannah	
          7 = Lemitar	
	
plot = alphabetical code for vegetation plot	
tree = tree number (number on tag)	
DBH = diameter at breast height, recorded in mm at 1.5 m above ground	
sex = gender of tree (m=male, f=female, u=unknown (no flowers)	


