Creator
Bosque Ecosystem Monitoring Program

Title
Surface active arthropods data from 1997-2016

Publisher
Bosque Ecosystem Monitoring Program

Publication Year
2020

Purpose
Pitfall traps at each site are used to measure surface active arthropod activity. The presence, absence, abundance, and diversity of particular arthropods provide on the ecological condition of each site.

Files
bemp_raw_leaf_litterfall_1997_2017.csv this is the raw by trap and line number

Data
site Site numbers for BEMP research sites. In order of when sites were added.
year Year the data was collected.
month Month the data was collected.
quantity Counts of species
lettercode lettercode for species name
name species or genus name
family number code for family
class number code for class
order number code for order
genspp numbercode for genus species
trap number of trap
line_number line the trap is set on

METHODS
Pitfall Monitoring Materials 

Day one supplies 

•Pitfall data sheet, clipboard, and pen 

•One hand trowel per person 

•Several ‘place holder’ cups with holes in the bottom 

•Several solid collection cups 

•Map of site 

•Extra wooden lids 

•Sharpie 

•Gloves if desired 

•Orange spray paint 

•Extra rebar 

 

Day two supplies 

•Pitfall datasheet, clipboard, and pen 

• 20 sandwich-sized re-sealable plastic bags (e.g. Ziploc bags) labeled with site name, collection date, and numbers 1 – 20 per site 

•Sharpie 

•One-gallon re-sealable plastic bag labeled with site name and collection date 

•Cooler and frozen ice pack 

•Plastic lids for closing collection cups 

•Hand trowel 

• Site map 

• Gloves if desired 

Pre-field Prep 

Bottom cup of the trap: Take half the cups and drill one hole through the bottom. 

Wooden lid: Cut 6 in x 6 in. wooden squares (out of plywood that is ½ in. thick), then drill 2.5 in. screws into all four corners. Paint the lid brown or grey so it is camouflaged. 

Collection bags: print labels for the collection bags with: site name, date of collection and trap number. Stick the labels onto the sandwich sized resalable collection bags and place all collection bags into a larger site collection bag.  

Pitfall trapping requires two site visits spaced 48 hours apart at each site. Pitfall traps consist of two plastic cups (see image), one inside the other, placed in the ground so the rim is level with the surface of the ground. A wooden lid held up with four screws is placed over the top to reduce predation and offer some protection from rainfall. The cup on the bottom is a place-holder so that the top trapping cup can be removed without the hole filling in. The bottom cup must have a hole at its base for water to drain. When traps are not actively in use, a solid plastic lid is placed on the top cup to prevent organisms from unnecessarily falling into the trap, and the wooden lid is pressed as closely into the ground as possible. Precipitation gauges are read when the traps are opened and again when they are collected and closed, to determine if rain has fallen at the site during the 48-hour trapping period. At BEMP sites, traps are marked with orange rebar and there are four traps at every other transect line (B, D, F, H, and J). 

 

Day one – setting the traps 

    On datasheet, record site name, date of setting, name of who is setting traps and time of setting.  

    Locate the first trap using site map. Lift wooden lid away from yourself (see image) to create a wall protecting you from any animals hiding under the lid, or inside the pitfall trap. Place the wooden lid aside with the screws pointed down to the soil.  

    Pull the inside cup out to ensure it separates easily from the bottom cup and remove any dirt that is between the two cups.  

    If cups are not in good condition (have cracks, are bent, etc.), replace one or both cups.  

    Replace the cup, remove plastic lid and pack dirt up to the edge of the cup so it is level with the ground. Ensure that the cup with the hole drilled in it is the bottom or ‘place keeper’ cup. The solid cup is the collection cup (the one that the bugs fall into). 

    Confirm that the rim of the top cup is level with the ground surface. If it is not level, take out both cups, re-dig the hole and replace the cups so that they are at the right level.  

Note: The rim of the cup needs to be level with the adjacent ground, and also level with the surrounding area. Do not create a mound around the trap that goes up to the rim of the cup, and do not have a depression around the trap that goes down to the rim of the cup. 

    Place the wooden lid back over the trap. The wooden lid should be about 1.5 inches above the collection cup, elevated by the screws.  

    If any leaves from around the pitfall trap were moved while setting it, put the leaves back around trap so there is not a bare area around the trap.  

    Read rain gauges and record current rain amounts on data sheet. Do not empty gauges!  

    If appropriate, replace or re-spray the rebar so the traps are easier to find.  

 

Day two (48 hours later) – collecting the traps 

    Record site name, date of collection, name of collectors, and time of collecting on data sheet.  

    Remove the wooden lid by opening it away from yourself. Pull the top cup out, leaving the bottom cup in place to hold the hole.  

Note: If the top cup has a hole in it, or the bottom cup does not have a hole in it, note that on the data sheet and on the collection bag’s label.  

    Empty the entire contents of each trap (bugs, leaves, dirt, etc.) into a plastic bag marked with that particular trap number, site, and date. Tap the sides of the collection cup to knock off any arthropods that may be holding onto the sides. Record any information regarding the condition of the trap if it is unusual (eg, if the trap was disturbed, not set well, has water in it) on the data sheet and plastic bag. If you find an empty trap, still empty the contents into the plastic bag and tap the collection cup, as there may be microscopic arthropods in the cup. 

    If vertebrate species have been caught, record the animal on the data sheet and plastic bag and release it. 

    If you can positively identify any large arthropods (Eleodes suturalis, Calosoma scrutator, Pasimachus sp., large wolf spider – Hogna sp., large centipede – Scolependra sp., child of the earth – Stenopelmatus sp., etc.), release them and note the identification and quantity on the data sheet and plastic bag with a Sharpie. It is especially important to release any large arthropod that can chew through the plastic bag, which are mainly the large centipedes and the children of the earth. Be super careful with these guys as their bites are painful and dangerous. 

    Replace the plastic lid securely onto the top cup and place it back into the bottom cup. If you don’t have a plastic lid for some reason, you can put some leaves and dirt into your trap so that the arthropods can easily escape or put a chunk of wood between the two cups so the cup is so elevated above the soil that no arthropods can crawl in. 

    Place the wooden lid over the cups and press it down so that it is flush with the soil. To reduce the potential for disturbance, the wooden lid can be covered with leaves and dirt. 

    Place all of the sandwich collection bags in the larger plastic bag along with the datasheet and put into a cooler with a frozen ice pack.  

    Read and record the rain gauge levels on the datasheet. Do not empty gauges (this will be done during monthly monitoring)! 

QA/QC
    Open the pitfall data file for your year of interest (“pitfallsYY”). 

    Check that data are present for May, June, and September for all sites monitored that year. Because the sites monitored can be in flux from year to year, consult the Science Coordinator to confirm which sites were monitored in your year of interest.  

    Filter the year, month, day, site, and quantity columns to check for any typos or prohibited values (ex, trap number cannot exceed 20, site number cannot exceed 32, etc).  

    Filter the trap column for periods. If there are missing trap numbers in rows with identified taxa, resolve the error by looking at the rest of the trap numbers entered for that site and month. If the error cannot be resolved, consult the datasheet; if this fails, remove the line to a “Removed Data” tab (likely an error with the month or site entry)  

    Verify that extremely large quantities (>100) make sense for the identified taxon. For example: pillbugs and mites sometimes appear in our traps in quantities >1000, but this would be unlikely for grasshoppers or moths. 

    Filter the “quantity” column and search for periods. If there are any missing quantities on lines with identified taxa, enter a “1” (most conservative value). Then filter the name column for “Missing/No Data” and ensure that the quantity column only contains periods. 

    Filter for zeroes and ensure that these are only typed in “No Capture” columns. Then filter “No Capture” and check that all these entries have zeroes in the quantity column.  

    Search the sheet for blank cells in every column but the name column (this is a separate step), and double periods (“..”). Ensure that these typos are corrected and filled with a single period.  

    Filter the “class” column for “9” (all non-arthropods). Highlight these entries blue. Remove the filter and filter the “Datasheet Notes” for any notes indicating a non-arthropod in the trap with an arthropod. Highlight these entries green, unless they are NO CAPTURES- then highlight these yellow. 

    Filter any column from J-O for an error code (“N/A”). Check that the “name” column is blank for all filtered entries. (If it is not, this indicates a problem with the autofill formulas. See “Updating Dropdown Lists and Autofill Formulas” below and fix it before continuing).  

    Filter the name column for blank entries. The missing names should have been entered in the “Datasheet Notes” column.  

    Check first for names that may be misspelled versions of species that already exist in the database—use the Master Code List Copy tab to help. If you can deduce the correct spelling, use the correct entry in the dropdown list and note the original spelling and your initials in the QA/QC notes column. 

    The remaining entries should all be new additions to the database that will need new species codes. Open the “allpitfalls” file and navigate to the Master Code List sheet. See “Creating New Species Codes” below. 

    When all the new species codes have been created in the Master Code List in allpitfalls, you will need to update the data validation list in pitfallsXX in order to be able to select them from the dropdown list, as well as the autofill formulas in allpitfalls in order to make the new codes appear in the dataset. See “Updating Dropdown Lists Autofill Formulas” below. 

    Finally, copy columns B-I and P-Q in pitfallsYY and paste them at the end of the AllData sheet in “allpitfalls”. Fill the “ID” column in “allpitfalls” with a drag-and-drop to create new ID numbers for the new data; so the same for columns J-O to trigger autofill for species codes.  

    Double check at least one new species entry to be sure that all the new codes autofilled correctly. 

    Update the “Metadata” file in the master file—include the date of update, the new time period the dataset covers, and, if applicable, review the entire metadata sheet to ensure all information is up to date and accurate. 

    Move “pitfallsYY” to “Old Data” in the Arthropods folder. 
